===== PAGE 1 =====
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information Processing and Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ipm
LLM-assisted fake news detection with adaptive boosting 
framework incorporating contrastive learning
Shu Yin a,b, Yuchen Wang
 b, Dongpeng Hou
 c, Wenxin An c, Chao Gao b, 
Xianghua Li b, Zhen Wang d,∗
a School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, China
b School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, China
c School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, China
d School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, Shaanxi, China
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Keywords:
Fake news detection
Social network
Large language model
Text analysis
 a b s t r a c t
With the rapid development of digital technologies, the widespread spread of fake news on so-
cial media platforms may threaten social stability. Existing methods often use small models as 
feature extractors for news content, relying on the inherent pattern diﬀerences between true and 
false news as the basis for fake news detection. However, smaller models cannot perceive latent 
background information in news content. Additionally, fake news is much less prevalent than 
true news on real social platforms, which may lead to issues with data collection imbalance of 
true and false labels. These challenges may limit the eﬀectiveness of existing detection meth-
ods. Therefore, we propose a Large Language Model-assisted Fake News Detection method with 
Adaptive Boosting, denoted as LFND-AB. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst employ the large language model 
to generate analyses of the truthfulness and falseness of news text, which contains background 
information about the news. We then design an explainable base learner for fake news detection 
that utilizes contrastive learning to align the similarity between the news text and the correspond-
ing generated analyses to obtain higher-quality fused representations. Furthermore, we design an 
adaptive ensemble boosting framework based on the base learner. This framework adjusts the 
weights of misclassiﬁed samples to improve the detection performance in the next base learner, 
thereby optimizing the model’s ability to handle label imbalance. The comprehensive experi-
ments conducted on benchmark datasets demonstrate that both the proposed base learner and 
LFND-AB outperform State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) methods. The implementation code is available at 
https://github.com/cgao-comp/FEND.
1.  Introduction
Social media is the product of the deep integration of the Internet and traditional social pathways (Hou et al., 2024). As digitization 
continues to develop, the various social platforms have revolutionized the way of communication and information acquisition. These 
digital changes have not only brought convenience to our daily lives but also caused an increase of fake news on social platforms (Dou 
et al., 2021). In the real world, the growing scale of fake news poses severe challenges to individual decision-making and public trust, 
∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: yinshu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (S. Yin), wany810@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (Y. Wang), hdp0918@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (D. Hou), 
wenxinan@mail.nwpu.edu.cn (W. An), cgao@nwpu.edu.cn (C. Gao), li_xianghua@nwpu.edu.cn (X. Li), w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn (Z. Wang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2026.104789
Received 22 September 2025; Received in revised form 31 January 2026; Accepted 30 March 2026
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
Available online 15 April 2026 
0306-4573/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
S. Yin et al.
Fig. 1. The illustration of the potential of Large Language Models (LLMs) for fake news detection task. LLMs could capture external knowledge, 
such as historical facts, that Small Language Model (SLM) based methods fail to learn from training datasets. Moreover, LLM’s expert-level inference 
capability can signiﬁcantly assist in fake news detection.
with the potential to inﬂuence public opinion and exacerbate social instability (Wu et al., 2021a). Moreover, existing studies show 
that fake news spreads faster and more widely than real news (Vosoughi et al., 2018). Without timely detection and clariﬁcation, 
fake news may result in long-term public misperception. Therefore, investigating how to eﬃciently and accurately verify large-scale 
online misinformation not only holds academic value but also has signiﬁcant practical implications (Hu et al., 2023). Such research 
can inform the development of deployable tools for integration into social media platforms, news organizations, and governmental 
monitoring systems, playing a crucial role in preserving information authenticity in online environments.
Some studies leverage social context signals (e.g., user comments, publisher proﬁles, and interaction patterns) during news prop-
agation to assist in detecting fake news (Cui & Jia, 2024). Graphs are widely used in modeling the news dissemination process, 
where nodes represent news articles or comments, and edges represent relationships through comments or shares (Wu & Hooi, 2023). 
This method helps in analyzing the spread patterns and interactions within the network, eﬀectively highlighting the characteristic 
patterns of fake news. For example, Bian et al. (2020) construct a bidirectional graph for the news propagation graph to capture 
the characteristics of rumor propagation and diﬀusion. Hyper-ISDR uses random hypergraph theory to more reasonably model the 
spread of Internet rumors and deeply explores the impact of group interaction on the dynamics of rumor propagation (Xia et al., 
2025). However, these methods typically rely on information that is costly to obtain (e.g., via large-scale web crawling) and often 
require time to accumulate (Wu et al., 2023b), which may be limited in certain scenarios (such as when comment data is sparse or 
during the early stages of news propagation). As a result, some research focuses solely on the news content for reality veriﬁcation, 
referred to as content-based fake news detection. Speciﬁcally, considering that fake news is often deliberately crafted to attract public 
attention, content-based methods detect fake news by extracting semantic and emotional features from the textual content (Zhang 
et al., 2021). However, news articles often contain latent background knowledge and cues that are diﬃcult for conventional Small 
Language Models (SLMs) to capture eﬀectively, limiting the depth of understanding these models can provide.
As a powerful tool, Large Language Models (LLMs) can capture and analyze ﬁne-grained segments (such as historical factual 
contexts) based on extensive knowledge bases and inference capabilities (Chen & Shu, 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). Although LLMs can 
mine the content within news articles, current studies indicate that directly using them as fake news classiﬁers is suboptimal (Hu et al., 
2024). Therefore, how to eﬀectively use LLMs to enhance the understanding of news content poses a signiﬁcant issue. Furthermore, 
the proportion of veriﬁable fake news is small compared to the real news on the Internet (Lu et al., 2024; Sheng et al., 2022), and the 
acquisition and cleaning of data require a lot of human resources. Therefore, designing a robust model to detect fake news eﬀectively 
under label imbalance conditions is crucial.
To address these issues, we propose an LLM-assisted Fake News Detection method with Adaptive Boosting (LFND-AB) using 
only textual content from the news, which includes textual content analysis, fake news base learner design, and ensemble boosting 
strategy. In the textual analysis phase, leveraging the extensive knowledge base and expert-level inference capabilities of LLMs, we 
generate reasons for each piece of news to analyze and support its truthfulness and falseness as Fig. 1. In the model design phase, an 
explainable base learner is designed to eﬃciently utilize these reasons and the original text to identify the veracity of the news. More 
speciﬁcally, after obtaining the embeddings of the textual content and its associated reasons using the Pre-trained BERT, we then 
propose a content-reason interaction attention module, which aggregates and reweights the textual content and each reason. Then, 
a sampling-based contrastive learning module is developed to improve the embedding quality of original textual content. Finally, 
a composite loss function is designed to diﬀerentiate the embedding of reasons supporting truthfulness or falseness, and guide the 
model for training. While the above LLM-assisted base learner can already perform well on its own, it may still be susceptible to 
label imbalance. In the ensemble boosting strategy, to further enhance robustness, we design an adaptive boosting framework to 
dynamically adjust each sample weight in the next base learner. Speciﬁcally, we reduce the weights of the samples that are correctly 
classiﬁed in the previous round and increase the weights of the samples that are misclassiﬁed. This ensemble mechanism allows the 
model to focus on harder cases in subsequent rounds, improving its overall eﬀectiveness. A series of experiments demonstrates the 
eﬀectiveness of the proposed LFND-AB method and the base learner. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
2 
===== PAGE 3 =====
S. Yin et al.
• LLMs are used to generate reasons supporting the truthfulness and falseness of news, providing external background knowledge 
to assist in fake news detection.
• An explainable fake news base learner is designed to integrate textual content and reasons, enhancing embedding quality dynam-
ically. 
• An adaptive boosting framework is introduced, speciﬁcally tailored for label-imbalanced datasets in fake news detection. 
2.  Related work
2.1.  SLM-Based fake news detection
As the fake news in social networks increases rapidly, automatically detecting fake news has become an urgent issue (Zhou 
& Zafarani, 2020). The task of detecting fake news can be seen as a classiﬁcation task for news. According to the features 
used, fake news detection methods can be divided into two categories: Social context-based methods and news content-based
methods.
Context-based methods use social context, such as user characteristics (Dou et al., 2021), comments (Jin et al., 2016), propagation 
networks (Zhang et al., 2024), to provide additional information to help detect fake news. Ma et al. (2018) model the information 
dissemination process as a tree with both bottom-up and top-down directions, using recurrent neural networks designed for tree 
structures to identify rumors. Due to the superior ability of GNNs to represent structured data, Bian et al. (2020) propose a bidirectional 
graph convolutional network that learns the characteristics of rumor propagation in both bottom-up and top-down directions, thereby 
enhancing the accuracy of rumor detection. To better capture structured information, GLAN constructs a heterogeneous graph for 
each post by establishing relationships between the original posts, reposts, and users, fully leveraging the correlations between 
diﬀerent types of nodes for rumor detection (Yuan et al., 2019). Additionally, considering the poor robustness of existing methods 
to noisy propagation structures, Sun et al. introduce graph adversarial contrastive learning to handle such complex scenarios, where 
contrastive learning is incorporated as part of the loss function to perceive the diﬀerences between similar and diﬀerent categories (Sun 
et al., 2022). Bazmi et al. (2023) introduce a multi-view attention network, which captures semantic and propagation structure clues 
through designed attention modules, providing reasonable explanations for fake news detection. Moreover, the historical information 
of the publisher can also assist in detecting fake news. For instance, Shu et al. (2019) study the relationship between user proﬁles 
and fake news, proposing a method to represent implicit features of user proﬁles, demonstrating the potential of user features in 
distinguishing fake news. However, acquiring the additional information required by these methods involves signiﬁcant resources, 
reducing their practicality.
Content-based fake news detection has garnered widespread attention due to the relatively low cost of dataset acquisition (Shu 
et al., 2017). These methods typically examine textual patterns in news articles, including writing style and article inclination (Przy-
byla, 2020), semantic features (Qi et al., 2021), and emotional characteristics (Luvembe et al., 2023). And most of the corresponding 
researches use small models to extract content features (Capuano et al., 2023). For example, Chen et al. (2018) use the Recurrent Neu-
ral Network (RNN) to capture long-term dependent features from news text sequences, while introducing the soft attention mechanism 
to capture time-varying features. To exploit the emotional information in the text, Zhang et al. (2021) propose the dual sentiment 
feature for fake news detection, which extracts the publisher sentiment and social sentiment and the similarities and diﬀerences 
between them from the text to judge the authenticity of the news.  Guo et al. (2023) construct positive and negative evidence graphs 
using news signals from the dataset. When detecting a particular news article, it is compared with the evidence graphs to generate 
relevant matching vectors to assist in fake news detection. To address fake news detection across multiple domains, Zhu et al. (2022b) 
introduce a multi-view fake news detection framework. This framework models news from three perspectives: semantics, sentiment, 
and style. Then it uses the unique information from these domains to eﬀectively identify fake news. Learning from multiple views, 
the framework captures both diﬀerences and commonalities across domains, improving the accuracy of fake news detection. To fur-
ther leverage auxiliary information, multimodal methods have been proposed to jointly utilize text and image features for fake news 
detection. For example, Wu et al. (2021b) propose the Multimodal Co-Attention Network (MCAN), which models the inter-modal 
interactions between visual and textual content, addressing the limitations of simple feature concatenation. Furthermore, CMMTN 
enhances multimodal fake news detection accuracy by employing a masked transformer architecture to fuse cross-modal signals and 
dynamically ﬁlter out irrelevant inter-modal context (Wang et al., 2023). Considering that fake news usually carries speciﬁc negative 
intentions, Wang et al. (2024a) construct a hierarchical intent classiﬁcation system based on psychological theory, and gradually 
infer the potential intentions of the article through the encoder-decoder model to detect fake news. Diﬀerent from traditional meth-
ods that treat news-related text data as sequences, Wu et al. (2023a) model them as graph-structured data and captures long-range 
semantic dependencies through neighborhood propagation, thereby eﬀectively reducing information redundancy and improving the 
accuracy of semantic representation. However, news often contains rich background information and clues that are diﬃcult for small 
models to extract. At the same time, the knowledge that pre-trained models learn during their pre-training phase limits the model’s 
capabilities and further restricts the performance of future fake news detection. For example, Bidirectional Encoder Representation 
from Transformers (BERT) is pre-trained on corpora like Wikipedia, making it diﬃcult to handle the rich background knowledge 
and potential clues in future news (Sheng et al., 2021). To address these issues, we propose the introduction of LLMs to understand 
the news content and generate analytical statements for each news instance, which incorporate additional information beyond the 
original text.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
3 
===== PAGE 4 =====
S. Yin et al.
2.2.  LLM-Based fake news detection
Recently, LLMs have demonstrated exceptional abilities in various ﬁelds, particularly in classiﬁcation, reasoning tasks, and other 
classic natural language processing tasks  (Chang et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022). In the speciﬁc context of fake news detection, 
Kuntur et al. (2024) provide a survey of LLM-based fake news detection methods, outlining how they extend pre-LLM approaches 
and summarizing their advantages, limitations, and open challenges.  Liang et al. (2024) explore a multi-agent debate framework, 
showcasing the collaborative problem-solving abilities of LLM agents. Strong et al. (2024) present a zero-shot fact veriﬁcation method 
based on natural logic and LLMs, emphasizing the model’s generalization ability and interpretability. However, LLMs have not per-
formed well as fake news detectors and come with high training costs (Hu et al., 2024). With their powerful reasoning capabilities, 
designing reasonable prompts for samples and analyzing the outputs to indirectly improve detection ability has shown potential for 
LLMs in the fake news detection domain. Li et al. (2024) propose a framework that uses externally acquired knowledge as prompts 
for LLMs, achieving good results in a zero-shot environment. Cheung and Lam (2023) train a detector based on LLaMa using exter-
nal knowledge. Furthermore, Wan et al. (2024) integrate LLMs to generate diverse user reactions, execute explainable agent tasks, 
and merge expert predictions, thus improving detection accuracy in the fake news detection process. In parallel, Courtroom-FND 
formulates fake news detection as a multi-role courtroom debate with a judge and two adversarial agents that switch roles, aim-
ing to reduce cognitive bias and improve decision reliability (Jin et al., 2025b). Moreover, PMTL-DisCo and CAPE-FND investigate 
prompting-based few-shot and zero-shot fake news detection (Jin et al., 2025a,c). SheepDog diﬀers from previous studies that use 
LLM to make accuracy judgments to distinguish false information from true information (Wu et al., 2024). Instead, it studies how 
LLM can enhance the style robustness of fake news detectors, especially by injecting style-diverse reconstructions and content-centric 
cues during training. However, there are challenges associated with using LLMs for fake news detection. One key issue is that the 
content generated by LLMs may sometimes suﬀer from low quality, which can degrade the overall performance. Therefore, designing 
a dynamic interaction attention module that selectively focuses on high-quality, relevant information from the LLM-generated content 
is crucial. What’s more, veriﬁable fake news is much less frequent than real news on actual social networks. Thus, improving the 
detection performance under imbalanced data conditions is an important consideration. While recent methods such as ARG (Hu et al., 
2024) and SheepDog (Wu et al., 2024) also leverage LLM-generated rationales, our approach introduces several novel designs. First, 
unlike ARG, which only generates single-perspective rationales supporting truthfulness, we employ dual-perspective prompting to 
generate both supporting and opposing reasons, providing more balanced and comprehensive interpretive signals. Second, we design 
a contrastive learning module that encourages the model to distinguish between aligned and misaligned news-reason pairs. Third, 
we further integrate these dual-perspective reasons into a boosting-based ensemble framework, where each base learner is adaptively 
trained with reweighted examples to handle data imbalance. These components together enable our model not only to beneﬁt from 
LLM knowledge but also to enhance robustness and explainability under limited supervision. 
3.  Method
Fake news detection is a binary classiﬁcation task, where the core objective is to identify the veracity of news articles (true or 
false). Given a news item with its textual content denoted as 𝐶, our approach initiates by generating two distinct sets of reasons by 
LLMs: 𝑅 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, 𝑟3
} supporting the news as true, and 𝐹 = {𝑓1, 𝑓2, 𝑓3
} suggesting it is false. Using the original text 𝐶 along with 
these generated reasons, the main goal is to develop a model function:
𝑓 (𝐶, 𝐹 , 𝑅) → 𝑦, (1)
where 𝑦 is the authentic label indicating the truthfulness of the news. The proposed LFND-AB includes three main phases: the LLM 
assistance phase for analytical data generation, the base learner design phase for fake news detection, and the ensemble strategy 
phase for performance boosting. Each phase is presented in the subsequent parts.
3.1.  Textual analysis and reason data generation
Considering the high overhead of multimodal information collection, our method focuses solely on the traditional textual content 
𝐶 of the news. As extensive knowledge bases and expert systems, LLMs have advanced reasoning capabilities and contextual compre-
hension by analyzing and generating insights that stand expert perspective. Leveraging these properties, LLMs are employed to mine 
the textual content 𝐶, focusing not only on contextual information but also on views that smaller models cannot deal with, such as 
historical and factual contexts, emotional tones, etc.
The rationale for using LLMs instead of traditional external knowledge sources, such as fact-checking databases or structured 
knowledge graphs, lies in the scalability and ﬂexibility that LLMs provide. While traditional knowledge sources are accurate and 
manually veriﬁed, they often demand signiﬁcant maintenance eﬀorts and are limited in scope (Wang et al., 2024b; Xie et al., 2024). In 
contrast, LLMs can oﬀer a more dynamic and adaptable solution (Pan et al., 2024). However, although LLMs enhance the background 
knowledge associated with news content, previous studies have shown that they are not ideally suited to function as standalone 
fake news detectors. Instead, they perform more eﬀectively when used to guide smaller models in their decision-making processes. 
Therefore, our method does not rely solely on the reasons generated by LLMs as the foundation for detecting fake news. Instead, we 
integrate these generated reasons with the original news content. We introduce a dual-perspective prompting strategy that guides 
LLMs to generate both true and false reasoning, oﬀering richer evidence than ARG.  Speciﬁcally, for each news text 𝐶, our methodology 
utilizes an LLM to generate three analytical statements supporting the news as true (𝑅 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, 𝑟3}) and three contesting it as false 
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
4 
===== PAGE 5 =====
S. Yin et al.
Fig. 2. Prompts used for generating reasons in the fake news detection process. The system prompt requests the generation of 3 reasons supporting 
the authenticity and 3 reasons supporting the falseness of the news, while the context prompt provides the news content for analysis.
(𝐹 = {𝑓1, 𝑓2, 𝑓3}). ChatGPT-4.0 1 is used as the LLM for generating reasons, and prompts are shown in Fig. 2. This balanced approach 
of generating reasons for both truthfulness and falseness ensures a comprehensive dataset, facilitating a more nuanced understanding 
and training of the subsequent fake news detection model.
In our experiments, generating reasons for each Chinese news item takes an average of 3.4 seconds with 208 input tokens and 242 
output tokens, while each English item takes an average of 3.6 seconds with 297 input tokens and 298 output tokens. For the Chinese 
dataset (1,000 news items), the input and output costs are $6.24 and $14.52, respectively, resulting in a total of $20.76. For the 
English dataset (1,000 news items), the input and output costs are $8.91 and $17.88, respectively, with a total of $26.79. 2 To reduce 
latency and computational cost, the generation of truthfulness and falseness reasons via LLMs is performed as a one-time preprocessing 
step for each news article. Rather than querying the LLM repeatedly during training or inference, the generated reasons are stored 
in structured JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) ﬁles, indexed by their corresponding news IDs. This design explicitly separates the 
high-cost LLM reasoning stage from the online detection stage, ensuring that the inference latency is bounded by model computation 
rather than API calls. Furthermore, the preprocessing stage can be executed oﬄine or in batch mode, which further improves the 
engineering feasibility of the proposed framework under diﬀerent system constraints. In real-world applications, when a new news 
article is encountered for detection, we can use the above prompt strategy to generate corresponding reasons, then save the reasons 
in the JSON ﬁle for downstream use. Moreover, the weight of the detection model should be updated periodically through ﬁne-tuning 
with new labeled data, and the saved generated reason ﬁles should be updated when shifts in topic or language style are observed.
3.2.  Fake news base learner design
Following the generation of datasets via LLM, our objective is to use the synthesized reasons 𝑅 and 𝐹 eﬀectively to determine 
the veracity of news articles. To achieve this, an explainable model is proposed to obtain composite representations for news, which 
is also the base learner of the ensemble boosting framework. The model includes three core modules: the content-reason interaction 
attention module, the contrastive learning module, and the loss function. Fig. 3 shows the framework of the model.
3.2.1.  Interaction attention module
Although LLMs can generate the truthfulness or falseness reasons based on external knowledge, their inherent hallucination 
problem may lead to fabricated evidence. This undermines the feasibility of using LLMs as direct predictors for fake news detection (Hu 
et al., 2024). The valid generated reasons often contain background knowledge related to the news content, which provide signiﬁcant 
value for the model to better understand the veracity of the news. To address this, we leverage the attention mechanism to implicitly 
learn the dynamic scores of diﬀerent reasons based on the downstream ground-truth labels. This allows the model to assign higher 
weights to reliable reasons while down-weighting less trustworthy reasons. In this way, the attention mechanism acts as a ﬁlter that 
mitigates the unreliable generated reasons in a data-driven manner.
The interaction attention module dynamically focuses on the original news and each pair of reasons, which includes the reason 
aggregation strategy and explainable weight adjustment strategy. The weight coeﬃcient reﬂects the importance of each reason, 
which can assist in judging fake news while maintaining explainability and improving the eﬀectiveness and transparency of the fake 
news detection process. While our model adaptively weights each reason via interaction attention, it does not explicitly assess causal 
relationships or inter-reason redundancy, which we consider these aspects as important directions for future research.
Given the news text 𝐶 and the sets of reasons 𝑅 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, 𝑟3} for truthfulness and 𝐹 = {𝑓1, 𝑓2, 𝑓3} for falseness, we employ the 
pre-trained BERT model to encode these texts into embeddings as:
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
ℎ𝐶 = BERT(𝐶)
ℎ𝑟𝑛 = BERT(𝑟𝑛)
ℎ𝑓𝑛 = BERT(𝑓𝑛)
, 𝑛 = 1, 2, 3, (2)
where ℎ𝑐, ℎ𝑟𝑛 , and ℎ𝑓𝑛 represent the embeddings of the main content 𝐶, reasons 𝑟𝑛 supporting truthfulness, and reasons 𝑓𝑛 supporting 
falseness, respectively. Subsequently, a content-based interaction attention mechanism is developed to dynamically focus on each 
1 https://openai.com/
2 Using ChatGPT-3.5-turbo as a more economical alternative, the input and output costs for the Chinese dataset (1,000 items) are $0.08 and $0.35. 
For the English dataset, the corresponding input and output costs are $0.10 and $0.14.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
5 
===== PAGE 6 =====
S. Yin et al.
Fig. 3. The illustration of an explainable base learner for fake news detection. (a) is the content-reason interaction attention module to obtain the 
information aggregation between the textual content and reasons, and the weight of each content-reason pair is evaluated. (b) is the contrastive 
learning module based on the self-attention mechanism, enhancing the embedding quality of the original content. (c) is the joint loss to diﬀerentiate 
reason embeddings representing opposing stances on truthfulness and falseness.
pair between the original text and each reason, which includes the reason aggregation strategy and explainable weight adjustment 
strategy. The reason aggregation strategy for the textual content is shown as follows:
𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 = sof tmax
(
𝐐(ℎ𝑋𝑛 ) ⋅ 𝐊(ℎ𝐶 )𝑇 ∕
√
𝑑
)
𝐕(ℎ𝐶 ), (3)
where 𝑋𝑛 ∈ 𝑋, and 𝑋 = 𝑅 ∪ 𝐹 = {𝑟1, 𝑟2, 𝑟3, 𝑓1, 𝑓2, 𝑓3}. 𝐐(ℎ𝑋𝑛 ) = 𝑊Qℎ𝑋𝑛 , 𝐊(ℎ𝐶 ) = 𝑊Kℎ𝐶 , and 𝐕(ℎ𝐶 ) = 𝑊Vℎ𝐶 . 𝑑 is the dimensionality. 
𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 denotes the n-th reason-guided content embedding. After using Eq.  (3), six distinct content embeddings that aggregate reasons 
supporting truthfulness or falseness are obtained, separately. Further, the importance of six distinct embeddings 𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 are diﬀerent 
intuitively. To evaluate their importance, an explainable weight coeﬃcient3 𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 is introduced using a reverse attention mechanism 
from the textual content to each reason, measuring how useful the n-th reason is for judging the veracity of the current news item.
𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 = MLP(sof tmax
(
𝐐(ℎ𝐶 ) ⋅ 𝐊(𝐻𝑋𝑛 )𝑇 ∕
√
𝑑
)
𝐕(𝐻𝑋𝑛 )), (4)
where MLP transfers the attention vector to a weight number. Then the explainable coeﬃcient 𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 can adjust the weight of the 
reason-attention based textual embedding 𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 .
𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 ← 𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 ⋅ 𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 . (5)
3.2.2.  Contrastive learning module
Six content embeddings incorporating true or false reasons are dynamically reweighted after executing the content-reason in-
teraction attention module. Contrastive learning is a representation learning paradigm that aims to learn discriminative features by 
bringing semantically similar samples closer and pushing dissimilar samples apart in the latent space (Wang et al., 2022). Since it 
has shown strong capability in improving representation learning and has achieved promising results across various tasks (Hu et al., 
2025), a contrastive learning strategy is employed to enhance the representation quality of original textual content. Based on the 
ground-truth labels, the embeddings of the original content are contrasted with those of the corresponding reasons by minimizing the 
distance between positive similar pairs (i.e., content and matching reason) and maximizing the distance between negative dissimilar 
pairs (i.e., content and opposing reason). To implement the procedure, we ﬁrst utilize a self-attention mechanism to enhance the 
textual relationships within the original content. The computation is deﬁned as follows:
𝐻𝐶 = sof tmax
(
𝐐(ℎ𝐶 ) ⋅ 𝐊(ℎ𝐶 )𝑇 ∕
√
𝑑
)
𝐕(ℎ𝐶 ). (6)
3 These weight coeﬃcients for each reason can be ranked, and the explainable weights are demonstrated in the Case Study.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
6 
===== PAGE 7 =====
S. Yin et al.
After the attention mechanism, the contrastive module is computed by contrasting a random positive pair against the set of negative 
pairs, which is demonstrated as follows:
CL(𝐻𝐶 ) = − log
(
exp(sim(𝐻𝐶 , 𝐒∗(𝐻 +))∕𝜏)
exp(sim(𝐻𝐶 , 𝐒∗(𝐻 +))∕𝜏)) + ∑3
𝑘=1 exp(sim(𝐻𝐶 , 𝐻−)∕𝜏)
)
, (7)
where 𝜏 is the temperature parameter that scales the similarity scores before the softmax normalization. In this work, we use the 
standard unscaled softmax without additional temperature tuning, and therefore set 𝜏 = 1. Here, 𝐻 + denotes the set of reason-guided 
content embeddings whose stance is consistent with the ground-truth label, while 𝐻 − denotes those with the opposite stance. For 
example, 𝐻 + = {𝐻𝑟1→𝐶 , 𝐻𝑟2→𝐶 , 𝐻𝑟3→𝐶 } when the ground-truth label is true, and 𝐻 + = {𝐻𝑓1→𝐶 , 𝐻𝑓2→𝐶 , 𝐻𝑓3→𝐶 } when the ground-
truth label is false, and 𝐻 − includes the instances opposite to those in 𝐻 +, 𝐒∗ denotes the random sampling operator, which selects 
an instance from the set, and sim(⋅, ⋅) is the learnable cosine similarity evaluation measuring the closeness between two vectors. The 
contrastive revision eﬀectively reﬁnes the discriminative ability of the embeddings of the textual content, ensuring that the learned 
representations are more aligned with the underlying truth or falsity of the news.
3.2.3.  Loss function
In the base learner for fake news detection, we design a comprehensive loss  to train the model, including a main loss item Main
for binary classiﬁcation, a contrastive loss item CL to enhance the quality of the original content embedding, a reason judgment loss 
item R_Pred to align the reasons with the ground-truth label, and a reason Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence item TF_KL to diﬀerent 
the reasons supporting truthfulness and reasons supporting falseness.
As for Main, a dynamic concatenation-based attention weight calculation module is employed to determine and normalize the 
weights across a set of seven main embeddings, denoted as 𝐻 Φ = {𝐻𝐶 , 𝐻𝑋𝑛→𝐶 }, where 𝑛 = 1, … , 6.
𝜙(𝐻) = sof tmax 𝐻∈𝐻 Φ (𝑒(𝐻)) = exp (𝑒(𝐻))∑
𝐻 ′∈𝐻 Φ exp (𝑒(𝐻 ′)) =
exp (ReLU (
⃖ ⃗𝑎𝑇 [𝑊𝐴
𝑇 𝐻]))
∑
𝐻 ′∈𝐻 Φ exp (ReLU (
⃖ ⃗𝑎𝑇 [𝑊𝐴
𝑇 𝐻 ′])) , (8)
where 𝑊𝐴 is the learnable matrix in the attention module, ⃖ ⃗𝑎 is the learnable attention vector used to map the transformed embedding 
into a scalar attention score, and 𝑒(𝐻) is the concatenation-based attention coeﬃcient of 𝐻. 𝜙(𝐻) can be viewed as the normalized 
contribution score of embedding 𝐻 in the ﬁnal prediction. Further, the multi-head attention can be executed for 𝐻 and the average 
operator is selected as the pooling process. Then the main loss is shown as follows:
Main = CE
(
MLP
(∑
𝐻∈𝐻 Φ 𝜙(𝐻) ⋅ 𝐻
)
, 𝑦
)
. (9)
where CE(⋅) denotes the standard cross-entropy loss between the predicted probabilities and the ground-truth labels.
As for R_Pred, reasons supporting the truthfulness or falseness of news inherently align with one perspective in the classiﬁcation 
tasks. Thus, they can also serve as auxiliary evidence for targeted retrieval of the veracity.
R_Pred = CE
(
MLP(CAT(𝐻𝑟𝑛→𝐶 )), 𝑦
)
+ CE
(
MLP(CAT(𝐻𝑓𝑛→𝐶 )), 𝑦
)
. (10)
As for TF_KL, to ensure that the embeddings for reasons supporting the truthfulness and reasons supporting the falseness capture 
distinct views of information, we compute the KL divergence between these two categories to enhance their diﬀerentiation. Therefore, 
we maximize the KL divergence between these two groups by subtracting TF_KL in the overall objective, encouraging the model to 
learn more separable and stance-aware reason representations.
TF_KL = KL(CAT(𝐻𝑟𝑛→𝐶 ), CAT(𝐻𝑓𝑛→𝐶 )). (11)
The the objective loss can be formulated as follows:
 = Main + 𝛽1 ⋅ CL + 𝛽2 ⋅ R_Pred − 𝛽3 ⋅ TF_KL. (12)
where 𝛽1, 𝛽2, and 𝛽3 are coeﬃcients that balance the contrastive loss CL, the reason prediction loss R_Pred, and the KL divergence 
term TF_KL with respect to the main ground-truth classiﬁcation loss Main.
3.3.  Ensemble boosting strategy
The above section has designed an explainable base learner for fake news detection, which can be directly applied to the de-
tection task. However, due to the common phenomenon where true news outnumbers false news in social networks, the dataset 
typically exhibits label imbalance. This imbalance often limits the performance of traditional small models. To address this issue, we 
further develop an ensemble boosting framework that combines multiple base learners and each new learner dynamically focuses on 
the misclassiﬁed samples in previous rounds, thereby collectively enhancing detection performance in an integrated manner. More 
speciﬁcally, in our adaptive boosting framework, each base learner contributes diﬀerently to the ﬁnal ensemble through sequential 
training and error-aware weight adjustments. The ﬁrst learner aims to capture the general distribution based on the average same 
weight loss for each sample. In contrast, the second learner focuses on correcting the errors of the ﬁrst by improving the weight loss 
of the misclassiﬁed samples. In summary, after each boosting round, the sample distribution is updated. As a result, each base learner 
focuses on diﬀerent aspects of the training data, which promotes error correction in subsequent stages and improves the ensemble’s 
overall robustness. 
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
7 
===== PAGE 8 =====
S. Yin et al.
Algorithm 1 The algorithm of LFND-AB.
Input: Number of the base learner 𝑁, the initialized base learners 𝜃𝑛 in the 𝑛-th round.
Output: The integrated model of base learners.
1: Initialize weights 𝑤𝑖 = 1
|𝑋| for all 𝑖 = 1, … , |𝑋| of the training set 𝑋
2: Record the vote number 𝑉 =0
3: for 𝑛 = 1 to 𝑁 do
4:  Fit the base learner 𝜃𝑛 to the training data using weights 𝑤𝑖 //Eqs. (2)–(12)
5:  Compute the error 𝜖𝑛 = ∑|𝑋|
𝑖=1 𝑤𝑖 ⋅ 𝐼(𝑦𝑖 ≠ 𝜃𝑛(𝑥𝑖))
6:  if 𝜖𝑛 > 0.5 then
7:  Terminate the ensemble boosting strategy
8:  end if
9:  Compute 𝛼𝑛 = 1
2 log
( 1−𝜖𝑛
𝜖𝑛
)
10:  Update weights 𝑤𝑖 ← 𝑤𝑖 ⋅ exp(−𝛼𝑛 ⋅ 𝑦𝑖 ⋅ 𝜃𝑛(𝑥𝑖))
11:  Normalize weights 𝑤𝑖 ← 𝑤𝑖
∑|𝑋|
𝑗=1 𝑤𝑗
12:  𝑉 = 𝑉 + 1
13: end for
14: The ﬁnal model is 𝑓 (𝜃) = Ω (𝛼𝑛𝜃𝑛
)
15: return 𝑓 (𝜃)
Fig. 4. The diagram of the integrated process for ensemble learning.
After implementing the ensemble boosting strategy, the complete LFND-AB can predict fake news with higher detection perfor-
mance. The algorithmic procedure of LFND-AB is illustrated in Algorithm 1. In summary, for scenarios requiring low overhead, the 
explainable base learner can be directly employed for detecting fake news. While in situations with imbalanced label datasets or 
where resources are permitted, LFND-AB oﬀers signiﬁcant advantages. These choices provide a ﬂexible framework for fake news 
detection tasks in social networks. Fig. 4 demonstrates the block diagram to express the process of integrated learning.
4.  Experiment
In this section, we conduct a series of experiments to conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of LFND-AB. The following subsections provide 
detailed insights into the datasets, experimental setup, baselines, and the results obtained.
4.1.  Datasets
To conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of LFND-AB, this paper conducts experiments on both real-world Chinese and English datasets. Among 
them, the Chinese dataset is from Weibo21 (Nan et al., 2021), and the English dataset is from Gossipcop (Shu et al., 2020). Building 
on the methodologies of previous studies (Hu et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2022a), the datasets are processed by removing duplicates and 
employing a temporal split. This approach is intended to prevent potential overestimation of performance that could result from data 
leakage in the SLM. The statistics for the datasets are shown in Table 1.
4.2.  Experiment setup
We implement our models using pytorch and the geometric package. The following experiments are run on the server with AMD 
Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5995WX 64-Cores CPU and four NVIDIA RTX A6000. We use the model with the highest macro F1-score 
(harmonic mean of precision and recall) of the validation set during training for prediction in the testing set. For the parameters in 
training, the optimizer is Adam, the learning rate is 7e-5, and the number of epochs is set to 64. To reduce overﬁtting, we apply 
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
8 
===== PAGE 9 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 1 
The detailed statistics of each dataset.
 Chinese  English
 Train  Val-  Test  Train  Val-  Test
 Real  2331  1172  1137  2878  1030  1024
 Fake  2873  779  814  1006  244  234
 Total  5204  1951  1951  3884  1274  1258
early stopping with 3 epochs, halting training if no improvement is seen in the validation set. For text encoding, we adopt chinese-
bert-wwm-ext for Chinese and bert-base-uncased for English datasets with a maximum input length of 170 and a hidden size of 
768. Two BERT encoders are used for the news content and rationale streams, respectively, where only the last Transformer layer 
is ﬁne-tuned. The ﬁnal classiﬁer is an MLP with a structure of 768 → 384 → 1 and a dropout rate of 0.2. The loss weights are set to 
𝛽1 = 0.001 for CL, 𝛽2 = 2.0 for R_Pred, and 𝛽3 = 1.0 for TF_KL. For the boosting framework, the number of base learners is set to 2 in 
LFND-AB. 
4.3.  Baselines
To validate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method, we compared it with two types of baselines as follows:
4.3.1.  SLM-Based methods
• BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) is the widely used pre-trained small language model. For Chinese and English datasets, we use chinese-
bert-wwm-ext and bert-base-uncased, respectively.
• EANNT (Wang et al., 2018) is a text-only variant of Event Adversarial Neural Network (EANN). EANN is a multimodal method 
using text and images to learn the pattern features of fake news. It innovatively employs the auxiliary task of event classiﬁcation 
to extract the invariant features of fake news events.
• HMCANT (Qian et al., 2021) is a text-only variant of Hierarchical Multi-modal Contextual Attention Network (HMCAN). HMCAN 
uses BERT and ResNet to extract textual and visual features, respectively, and detects fake news by modeling both inter-modal 
and intra-modal relationships through a multimodal contextual attention module. 
• DualEmotionP (Zhang et al., 2021) is a variant of DualEmotion that uses only news content. DualEmotion uses the dual emotions 
of the news content (publisher) and the comments (social) to assist in the detection of fake news.
• ENtity DEbiasing Framework (ENDEF) (Zhu et al., 2022a) employs causal learning techniques to eliminate entity bias, enhancing 
its ability to generalize across fake news datasets with distribution shifts.
4.3.2.  LLM-Based methods
• GPT-3.5-turbo (OpenAI, 2022) is the performance of the LLM using zero-shot CoT with the commonsense perspective, following 
the experimental settings in the SOTA work (Hu et al., 2024).
• SuperICL (Xu et al., 2024) uses SLM as an in-context learning plug-in for the LLM. It enhances the testing phase by incorporating 
both the prediction and the conﬁdence level of each sample directly into the prompt.
• Adaptive Rationale Guidance network (ARG) (Hu et al., 2024) uses SLMs to selectively harness insights derived from the 
rationales generated by LLMs, optimizing the process of news analysis.
• Explanation-Guided Network (EGN) (Phung Mai Suong et al., 2025) uses LLMs to generate common sense and sentiment expla-
nations for news through CoT prompting, thereby enabling the detection of fake news.
• TED (Liu et al., 2025) uses agents supporting and questioning the veracity of news stories to simulate a human debate process for 
evaluating news content.
4.4.  Overall performance
The fake news detection performance based on diﬀerent datasets is illustrated in Table 2. It can be seen that the lightweight 
proposed model, i.e., explainable base learner LFND, exhibits the best detection performance among all SOTA methods. Compared to 
the optimal baseline ARG, LFND demonstrates an average improvement of 1.2% in the Chinese dataset and 1.1% in the English dataset. 
There are three reasons for the improvement: 1) The reasons supporting the truthfulness or falseness of LLM explore opposing but 
comprehensive perspectives, oﬀering a broader range of speciﬁc external knowledge rather than vague generalizations. Furthermore, 
by requiring three reasons per perspective, the bias of the given reasons can be minimized and the robustness is enhanced. 2) The 
sampling based contrastive learning not only introduces randomness to avoid overﬁtting but also enhances the quality of textual 
content embeddings by encouraging proximity between positive pairs and enhancing the diﬀerentiation between negative pairs. 3) 
The joint loss function comprehensively considers the role of each type of embedding in the fake news detection task, ensuring the 
quality of all embeddings, which optimizes model training.
Then, we consider the eﬀectiveness of the ensemble boosting strategy, and the LFND-AB is validated. It can be seen that the 
ensemble strategy can further enhance the detection performance. Compared to the optimal baseline ARG, LFND-AB demonstrates an 
average improvement of 2.4% in the Chinese dataset and 2.3% in the English dataset.  The primary reason for the further improvement 
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
9 
===== PAGE 10 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 2 
Performance metrics for diﬀerent models on fake news detection. The bold values represent the best results, while 
underlined values denote the second-best.
Group Model  Chinese  English
 macF1  Acc. 𝐅𝟏𝐑𝐞𝐚𝐥 𝐅𝟏𝐅𝐚𝐤𝐞  macF1  Acc. 𝐅𝟏𝐑𝐞𝐚𝐥 𝐅𝟏𝐅𝐚𝐤𝐞
SLM-based Methods
 BERT  0.753  0.754  0.769  0.737  0.765  0.862  0.916  0.615
 EANNT  0.754  0.756  0.773  0.736  0.763  0.864  0.918  0.608
 HMCANT  0.758  0.760  0.778  0.738  0.766  0.864  0.915  0.617
 DualEmotionP  0.761  0.763  0.784  0.738  0.766  0.868  0.920  0.611
 ENDEF  0.765  0.766  0.779  0.751  0.768  0.865  0.918  0.618
LLM-based Methods
 GPT-3.5-turbo  0.725  0.734  0.774  0.676  0.702  0.813  0.884  0.519
 SuperICL  0.757  0.759  0.779  0.734  0.736  0.864  0.920  0.551
 ARG  0.784  0.786  0.804  0.764  0.790  0.878  0.926  0.653
 EGN  0.781  0.785  0.802  0.760  0.791 0.889 0.933  0.650
 TED  0.755  0.756  0.767  0.744  0.743  0.854  0.912  0.574
 LFND 0.793 0.795 0.815 0.770 0.799 0.889 0.933 0.665
 LFND-AB  0.817  0.819  0.823  0.811  0.823  0.904  0.943  0.704
Table 3 
Training/testing time and GPU memory usage comparison between base learner and ensemble 
variant on English and Chinese datasets.
 Dataset  Variant  Train Time (s/epoch)  Test Time (s/epoch)  GPU Memory (MiB)
English  Base Learner  46  11  11,478
 Ensemble (2×)  46  22  12,510
Chinese  Base Learner  63  17  11,422
 Ensemble (2×)  63  35  12,328
is that each new learner not only keeps the advantages mentioned above but also dynamically adjusts the weights of training samples 
based on the classiﬁcation results of the previous base learner, including decreasing the weights of correctly classiﬁed samples and 
increasing the weights of incorrectly classiﬁed samples. Consequently, the combined capabilities of the ensemble learners result in a 
stronger and more accurate detection of samples. Overall, the proposed methods provide ﬂexible options for fake news detection in 
diﬀerent scenarios. The lightweight LFND method requires less overhead, and the LFND-AB method has better detection performance.
What’s more, the results reveal distinctions between SLM-based and LLM-based baselines. While LLMs are generally considered 
to possess stronger semantic reasoning abilities, their performance in this task does not consistently surpass that of smaller models. 
Speciﬁcally, GPT-3.5-turbo performs worse than all SLM-based baselines across both datasets. This suggests that, although LLMs have 
access to large-scale knowledge, their performance may be hindered in specialized tasks like fake news detection, particularly when 
they are not ﬁne-tuned for task-speciﬁc reasoning. Similarly, SuperICL shows improvements over some SLM-based baselines but fails 
to outperform SOTA SLM-based methods such as ENDEF. This may be attributed to the nature of fake news detection, which often 
requires understanding semantic and factual cues. While SuperICL incorporates SLM predictions and conﬁdence scores as auxiliary 
input for in-context learning, this signal may be insuﬃcient to fully represent the deeper patterns necessary for accurate detection. 
In contrast, ARG exhibits stronger performance, owing to its strategy of selectively utilizing LLM-generated rationales through small 
models, narrowing the semantic gap and avoiding overreliance on potentially noisy or hallucinated content from LLMs. This ﬁnding 
aligns with our design intuition in LFND, that is, rather than directly trusting LLM outputs, it is more eﬀective to treat them as 
auxiliary input and apply learnable interaction mechanisms to select and integrate high-quality reasoning. Additionally, our proposed 
contrastive learning strategy and composite loss formulation ensure that the model does not merely memorize LLM content but learns 
to align relevant features and ﬁlter useful signals.
We further report the GPU memory usage, the training time, and the test time for both the single base learner and the ensemble 
variant. As shown in Table 3, in the English dataset, the base learner requires 46 seconds per training epoch, 11 seconds per test 
epoch, and uses 11,478 MiB of GPU memory. The ensemble variant with 2 base learners maintains the same training time per epoch, 
increases test time to 22 seconds per epoch, and uses 12,510 MiB of memory. In the Chinese dataset, the base learner takes 63 seconds 
for training and 17 seconds for testing per epoch, with 11,422 MiB of memory usage, while the ensemble variant takes the same 63 
seconds for training, 35 seconds for testing, and consumes 12,328 MiB of memory. These results show that the ensemble strategy 
introduces minimal additional memory overhead, with GPU memory usage increasing by less than 10% compared to the single base 
learner. In terms of inference time, the increase is approximately linear with respect to the number of base learners, which conﬁrms 
the eﬃciency and scalability of the ensemble strategy.
4.5.  Statistical comparison analysis
As shown in Section 4.4, following the same seed from the SOTA method, the reported gains are modest (typically less than 3 
percentage points in macF1 over ARG). To support claims of LFND’s superiority and more rigorously assess whether performance im-
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
10 
===== PAGE 11 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 4 
Statistical comparison analysis of macF1 between LFND and ARG methods (15 paired 
experiments using diﬀerent random seeds) in the English dataset.
Metric Method Mean ± Std  Signiﬁcance Testing
 paired t-statistic  p-value  95% CI
macF1  LFND  0.803 ± 0.004 5.308 <0.001*** [0.006, 0.015] ARG  0.792 ± 0.008
Note: The t-statistic reﬂects the standardized diﬀerence between LFND and ARG over 
multiple runs; higher absolute values indicate stronger separation between the two 
methods. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; CI represents 95% conﬁdence interval 
for the diﬀerence (LFND - ARG).
Table 5 
Detailed ranking table for MacF1 across 10 seeds. Rankings are based on performance values for each seed (1=best, 
3=worst). Each numeric column represents a diﬀerent seed set in the corresponding experimental settings.
 Experimental Seed  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  Avg. Rank
 LFND  1  1  1  2  1  1  1  2  2  1  1.30
 ARG  2  2  2  1  2  2  2  1  1  2  1.70
 BERT  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3  3
provements are statistically signiﬁcant, we further report mean ± standard deviation over 15 diﬀerent seeds, and include signiﬁcance 
testing of paired t-tests and conﬁdence intervals. The paired t-test statistic is calculated as:
𝑡 = ̄𝑑
𝑠𝑑 ∕
√
𝑛
, (13)
where ̄𝑑 is the mean diﬀerence between paired observations (LFND - ARG), 𝑠𝑑 is the standard deviation of the diﬀerences, and 𝑛 is the 
number of paired observations. A positive t-statistic indicates that LFND performs better on average, while a negative value indicates 
that ARG performs better.
As shown in Table 4, for the macF1 metric, LFND demonstrates signiﬁcantly better performance (0.803 vs 0.792, p < 0.001) 
with a t-statistic of 5.308. The 95% conﬁdence interval [0.006, 0.015] does not include zero, conﬁrming the statistical signiﬁcance. 
Overall, the mean, standard deviation, and the corresponding paired t-tests and conﬁdence intervals over 15 diﬀerent seeds indicate 
that LFND demonstrates stable and robust macF1 performance superiority.
To further count the signiﬁcance of the performance diﬀerences among the algorithms, we conduct the non-parametric statistical 
test (Demšar, 2006). Speciﬁcally, we employ the Friedman test to assess overall signiﬁcance. Before performing the test, we summarize 
the average rankings of three representative algorithms across 10 experimental seeds in Table 5. These rankings serve as the basis 
for subsequent statistical analysis. The tests are conducted at a signiﬁcance level of 𝛼 = 0.05. The Friedman test evaluates the null 
hypothesis that all algorithms perform equivalently. The test statistic is computed as:
𝜒 2
𝐹 = 12𝑁
𝑘(𝑘 + 1)
[
∑
𝑗
𝑅2
𝑗 − 𝑘(𝑘 + 1)2
4
]
= 12𝑁
𝑘(𝑘 + 1)
𝑘∑
𝑗=1
̄𝑅2
𝑗 − 3𝑁(𝑘 + 1), (14)
where 𝑁 = 10 is the number datasets using diﬀerent seeds, 𝑘 = 3 is the number of selected algorithms, and ̄𝑅𝑗 denotes the average 
rank of the 𝑗-th algorithm. Given the average ranks ̄𝑅1 = 1.3, ̄𝑅2 = 1.7, and ̄𝑅3 = 3.0, we compute:
𝜒 2
𝐹 = 12 × 10
3 × 4 (1.32 + 1.72 + 3.02) − 3 × 10 × 4 = 15 .8.
With degrees of freedom 𝑘 − 1 = 2 , the critical value from the Chi-square distribution at 95% conﬁdence is 𝜒 2
0.05(2) = 5 .991. Since 
15.8 > 5.991, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the performance diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant. The Friedman 
test conﬁrms signiﬁcant diﬀerences among the representative algorithms overall.
4.6.  Ablation study
In this ablation study, we ﬁrst investigate the impact of the truthfulness and falseness reasons used in our model on the overall 
performance. Speciﬁcally, we conduct experiments using only the truthfulness reasons and using only the falseness reasons as follows:
• LFND_R uses only three truthfulness reasons instead of using all reasons.
• LFND_F uses only three falseness reasons instead of using all reasons.
Second, we further study the inﬂuence of designed components of LFND-AB on the fake news detection performance to prove 
their contributions. The critical modules of LFND-AB include the explainable weight evaluation module, contrastive learning nodule, 
joint loss function, and the ensemble boosting strategy. The variant models of LFND and LFND-AB are developed as follows:
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
11 
===== PAGE 12 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 6 
The detection performance evaluation of variants from LFND or LFND-AB in the English 
dataset.
 Groups  Variants  macF1  Acc. 𝐅𝟏𝐑𝐞𝐚𝐥 𝐅𝟏𝐅𝐚𝐤𝐞
Variants related to reasons integrated LFND_R  0.769  0.868  0.921  0.617
LFND_F  0.778  0.872  0.922  0.635
Variants related to modules introduced
LFND_W−  0.773  0.874  0.924  0.621
LFND − Main  0.771  0.854  0.909  0.632
LFND − CL  0.783  0.883  0.930  0.635
LFND − R_Pred  0.771  0.862  0.915  0.627
LFND − TF_KL  0.777  0.873  0.923  0.630
 LFND-AB_AVG  0.789  0.884  0.931  0.647
The complete methods  LFND 0.799 0.889 0.933 0.665
 LFND-AB  0.823  0.904  0.943  0.704
Table 7 
The detection performance of LFND under dual-component 
removal in the English dataset.
 Variants  macF1  Acc. 𝐅𝟏𝐑𝐞𝐚𝐥 𝐅𝟏𝐅𝐚𝐤𝐞
LFND − R–F  0.762  0.870  0.922  0.603
LFND − R_Pred–CL  0.764  0.870  0.922  0.605
LFND − R_Pred–TF_KL  0.766  0.871  0.923  0.610
LFND − CL–TF_KL  0.788  0.880  0.921  0.655
• LFND_W− uses a matrix consisting entirely of 1 to replace the explainable weight matrix 𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 in Eq.  (4).
• LFND − Main remove the main loss item in Eq.  (9).
• LFND − CL remove the contrastive loss item in Eq.  (7).
• LFND − R_Pred remove the reason prediction loss item in Eq.  (10).
• LFND − TF_KL remove the KL divergence loss item between true and false reasons in Eq.  (11).
• LFND-AB_AVG keeps the weight of each sample unchanged in the new base learners.
As can be seen from Table 6, using only the falseness reasons results in a slightly lower F1-score, suggesting that focusing solely 
on falseness does not provide enough information to distinguish fake news eﬀectively. Similarly, using only the truthfulness reasons 
leads to a further decrease in performance, indicating that the truthfulness reasons alone are less informative and may not be suﬃcient 
for accurate fake news detection.
What’s more, the results also show that removing key components from the model architecture results in varying performance 
reductions. Speciﬁcally, LFND_W−, which uses a matrix of 1s to replace the explainable weight matrix, shows a noticeable drop 
in performance. LFND_W− removes the model’s ability to assign diﬀerentiated importance to each rationale and thereby disables 
the attention mechanism. This indicates that the attention-based weighting plays a key role in mitigating the impact of noisy or 
less relevant reasons. And the removal of the diﬀerent loss terms also leads to a slight decrease in performance, suggesting that 
the loss terms contribute to model training. LFND-AB_AVG, where the weights of each sample are kept unchanged in the new base 
learners, performs slightly worse than the full LFND-AB, suggesting that the adaptive weight adjustment in LFND-AB contributes to 
better performance by focusing on the most informative samples. In conclusion, each component, including the explainable weight 
matrix, reason prediction, contrastive learning, and adaptive weight adjustment, plays an important role in enhancing the model’s 
performance.
To further understand the joint eﬀect of diﬀerent components in LFND, we conduct dual-component ablation experiments by 
simultaneously removing two reason-related modules. The results are shown in Table 7. First, we examine the variant LFND − R–F, 
where all truthfulness and falseness reasons are removed. This also implicitly disables all three reason-related loss terms (R_Pred, CL, 
and TF_KL). As expected, this variant results in the lowest overall performance, especially in detecting fake news (F1Fake = 0.603), 
validating that the generated reasons by LLMs play a critical role in enhancing fake news detection. Second, when comparing diﬀerent 
combinations of two loss terms being removed, we observe that the removal of R_Pred consistently leads to larger performance 
degradation than removing either CL or TF_KL. This is reasonable since R_Pred is a supervised binary classiﬁcation loss on reasons, 
directly aligned with the fake news detection objective. Therefore, it serves as a central component among the auxiliary tasks. 
Interestingly, the variant LFND − CL–TF_KL achieves better performance than the variant where either CL or TF_KL is individually 
removed (as shown in Table 6). Since both losses are designed to separate real and fake news representations in the latent space via 
contrastive learning and KL divergence regularization, respectively. The results imply that these two losses are mutually reinforcing. 
When used together, they better shape the representation space. However, when only one is considered, the joint synergy is partially 
broken, leading to suboptimal representation learning.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
12 
===== PAGE 13 =====
S. Yin et al.
Fig. 5. Performance of LFND_1, LFND_2, and LFND on the Chinese and English datasets, showing the impact of diﬀerent numbers of reason pairs.
4.7.  Other experiments
4.7.1.  The impact of the number of reason pairs
To explore the impact of diﬀerent numbers of reason pairs on the results, we conducted experiments on both the Chinese and 
English datasets using one pair of reasons (LFND_1) and two pairs of reasons (LFND_2), respectively. For LFND_1, we separately use 
the ﬁrst, second, and third sets of reasons, taking the highest performing result. Similarly, for LFND_2, we use the combinations of 
the ﬁrst and second reasons, the second and third reasons, and the ﬁrst and third reasons, again selecting the highest-performing 
combination.
The results in Fig. 5 show that performance improves gradually with an increasing number of reason pairs. Several reasons support 
this phenomenon: 1) The quality of reason pairs generated by LLM signiﬁcantly contributes positively to fake news detection; 2) Our 
model can adaptively focus on the more valuable reasons, minimizing the impact of lower-quality reason pairs. 3) The increased 
number of reason pairs provides more negative sample pairs in the contrastive learning process, which has been shown to play a 
crucial role in enhancing model performance.
4.7.2.  The impact of imbalanced data
In real-world scenarios, collecting high-quality fake news samples is generally more diﬃcult than collecting real news. To better 
evaluate LFND’s detection performance under such practical conditions, we conduct ablation experiments under imbalanced category 
data to compare the performance diﬀerences of the model when using and not using this ensemble strategy. In our original Chinese 
dataset, the number of real and fake news instances used for training is approximately balanced, with 2331 real news and 2873 fake 
news articles. To simulate increasing levels of fake news scarcity, we keep the real news portion ﬁxed and construct two imbalanced 
training subsets by randomly downsampling the fake news portion:
• The 1/2 setting retains half of the original fake news (1,437 fake vs. 2331 real).
• The 1/3 setting retains only one-third of the original fake news (958 fake vs. 2331 real).
We then evaluate the performance of both the base model LFND and the boosted variant LFND-AB under the same imbalanced 
conditions, as shown in Table 8. From the results, we observe that under identical data imbalance conditions, LFND-AB consistently 
outperforms LFND. For example, in the 1/2 setting, LFND-AB improves macro-F1 by 1.57% over LFND. And in the 1/3 setting, the 
improvement is 1.64%. This demonstrates that the adaptive boosting strategy in LFND-AB helps the model focus on hard-to-classify 
instances and alleviates the performance degradation caused by label imbalance. Several factors contribute to these results. For 
the base learner LFND, the contrastive learning module improves the discriminative power of the embeddings by ensuring that the 
representations of fake and real news remain separable despite reduced training samples from the minority class. For the complete 
LFND-AB, the boosting strategy dynamically reweights misclassiﬁed samples during training, placing greater emphasis on challenging 
instances. This procedure allows the model to focus on the minority class, thus preventing the degradation of performance that often 
accompanies imbalanced data. Even as the amount of available fake news decreases, AB ensures that the model continues to learn 
eﬀective decision boundaries.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
13 
===== PAGE 14 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 8 
Performance of LFND and LFND-AB under 
varying levels of fake news scarcity in the Chi-
nese dataset.
 Drop Rate  0 (original)  1/3  1/2
 LFND  0.7934  0.7922  0.7817
 LFND-AB  0.8172  0.8086  0.7974
Table 9 
Performance of reasons generated by diﬀerent LLMs 
on the Chinese dataset.
 Used LLM  ChatGPT-4.0  ChatGPT-3.5  Doubao
 LFND  0.7934  0.7878  0.7863
 LFND-AB  0.8172  0.8121  0.8117
4.7.3.  The impact of diﬀerent LLMs
To investigate the impact of using diﬀerent Large Language Models to generate truthfulness and falseness reasons, we experiment 
with ChatGPT-3.5, ChatGPT-4.0, and Doubao 4 on the Chinese dataset. Each LLM is employed to produce reasons supporting both the 
authenticity and falsity of the news samples. The results, shown in Table 9, compare the performance of LFND and LFND-AB when 
equipped with reasons generated by these diﬀerent LLMs.
The experimental results in Table 9 indicate that ChatGPT-4.0 achieves slightly better performance than ChatGPT-3.5 and Doubao. 
This improvement may be attributed to ChatGPT-4.0’s ability to produce more nuanced and context-rich reasons, which in turn can 
provide slightly more reﬁned representations for the model. However, the overall impact on the ﬁnal performance of the detection 
framework is not substantial. This is likely because our existing modules–such as contrastive learning and the attention mechanisms–
are eﬀective at selectively integrating and reﬁning the information provided by the LLMs, thereby minimizing any performance 
discrepancies arising from the choice of LLM.
4.7.4.  Case study
To demonstrate the explainable weight evaluation module in Eq.  (4), we present a case study to visualize how 𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛 works, as 
illustrated in Table 10. The LFND model correctly identiﬁes the given example as fake news. Among the six reasons, the third reason 
supporting the falseness of the news receives the highest weight, which indicates that the LFND model eﬀectively leverages the given 
reasons to determine the veracity of the news content.
To investigate whether the explainable weights assigned by the attention module align with human-perceived reason quality, we 
conduct a small-scale human evaluation using 10 instances of news items. For each news item, ﬁve annotators are asked to score 
the quality of six LLM-generated reasons based on the persuasiveness of each reason in supporting or refuting the veracity of the 
original news content. The reason’s quality scores are on a scale from 1 (least convincing quality) to 6 (most convincing quality), and 
each annotator is required not give repeated quality scores for six reasons to align and compare with the attention rank mechanism. 
And the average human-rated reason quality score of each news is computed to compare the consistency of the model attention 
weights. Although some individual variations exist, we consistently observe a general trend in 10 instances. Reasons assigned higher 
attention weights by the model tend to receive higher human quality ratings. In particular, when the model assigns signiﬁcantly 
higher attention weights to the truthfulness reason group compared to the falseness group, the average human-rated reason quality 
scores for the truthfulness reasons are also notably higher. 
A case study in Table 10 also reports the average human-rated reason quality score alongside the model attention weights. The 
results demonstrate a general alignment between the model’s attention weights and human-perceived reason quality. We observe a 
positive correlation trend: reasons that receive higher attention weights from the model also tend to be rated as higher convincing 
qualities by human annotators. For example, the reason “Rumors and speculative elements…” obtains both the highest attention 
score (0.6876) and the highest average human-rated reason quality score (5.0). In contrast, the reason “Photographic evidence can 
serve as veriﬁcation…” receives a relatively low attention score (0.3693), and its average human-rated reason quality score is also 
low (1.8). This further supports the alignment between model-assigned importance and human-perceived reasoning quality across 
diﬀerent examples.
Further, Fig. 6 demonstrates how the base learners in the LFND-AB framework function cooperatively. During training, the ﬁrst 
base learner is trained on the original average weighted data. The misclassiﬁed samples are assigned higher weights, and the others 
are assigned lower weights. Then, these weights for samples are passed to the second learner, which mainly focuses on correcting 
the errors. Each learner’s inﬂuence on the ﬁnal prediction is controlled by a normalized ensemble weight, which reﬂects its relative 
conﬁdence. During inference, each learner makes predictions independently, and the ﬁnal prediction is a weighted combination of all 
4 https://huggingface.co/doubao-llm
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
14 
===== PAGE 15 =====
S. Yin et al.
Table 10 
Case study of the explainable weights (Weighta) assigned by the attention module (𝑊𝐶→𝑋𝑛
 in Eq.  (4)) and the quality 
scores of reasons (Scoreh) derived from average human evaluation. Higher attention weights indicate stronger model 
support for a given reason, while higher human-rated reason quality scores reﬂect stronger perceived support for that 
reason in judging news veracity.
Textual Content Reason Weighta Scoreh
[Label: Fake News]
Everything’s ﬁne 
between Soﬁa Richie and 
Scott Disick! The couple 
were spotted on a date 
just 3 weeks after 
cheating rumors ﬂoated 
around. Scott even got a 
bit handsy! See the pics! 
Scott Disick, 35, and 
Soﬁa Richie, 19, just 
proved that their 
relationship is as strong 
as ever. The pair met up 
for a smoothie date, and 
were all smiles as they 
were photographed 
leaving Sun Life Organics 
in Calabasas. At one 
point, Kourtney 
Kardashian’s 
ex-boyfriend even 
pinched the model’s butt 
while she laughed at his 
antics. Cute! See the PDA 
pictures of Scott and 
Soﬁa here. The 
aﬀectionate outing 
comes just three weeks 
after the couple were 
enthralled in breakup 
rumors over an alleged 
cheating incident.
[Truthfulness reason] Photo-
graphic evidence can serve as 
veriﬁcation of the event, provid-
ing visual conﬁrmation of the 
couple’s date and aﬀectionate 
behavior.
0.3693 1.8
[Truthfulness reason] The news 
mentions a speciﬁc location 
and recognizable public ﬁgures, 
adding credibility to the story.
0.6262 3.6
[Truthfulness reason] The time-
line provided (three weeks after 
cheating rumors) matches up with 
publicly known events about the 
couple.
0.3915 2.2
[Falseness reason] Tabloid-style 
language and sensationalism 
could indicate that the story is 
exaggerated or fabricated for 
entertainment purposes.
0.5796 4.4
[Falseness reason] Lack of direct 
quotes or statements from the in-
dividuals involved or their repre-
sentatives makes the information 
less reliable.
0.5315 4.0
[Falseness reason] Rumors and 
speculative elements, such as the 
alleged cheating incident, are 
common in gossip columns, which 
often blend truth with ﬁction.
0.6876 5.0
Fig. 6. An illustration of the LFND-AB adaptive boosting process. During training, each base learner is trained sequentially with updated sample 
weights based on previous prediction errors. The ﬁnal ensemble weights are normalized and used to combine predictions from all learners during 
testing. This process allows each learner to focus on diﬀerent aspects of the data distribution, enhancing overall model robustness.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
15 
===== PAGE 16 =====
S. Yin et al.
Fig. 7. t-SNE visualization of feature embeddings in English and Chinese datasets. Aggregation with reason representations (a, c) yields more 
separable clusters between real and fake news than using content alone (b, d), in both English and Chinese datasets. Red and blue colors represent 
fake and real news items. Blue crosses denote real news items that are incorrectly classiﬁed as fake and red crosses denote fake news items that are 
incorrectly classiﬁed as real.  (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this 
article.)
learners’ outputs. This design ensures that each base learner contributes uniquely to improving the model’s robustness, particularly 
in detecting diﬃcult samples like fake news.
4.7.5.  Feature-level visualization
To better understand how the feature space reﬂects the discrimination between fake and real news, t-SNE is employed to project 
high-dimensional features into two-dimensional space. As shown in Figs. 7 (a) and (c), the aggregated embeddings that combine 
content and reason representations lead to clearer separation between fake and real news, compared to using content embeddings 
alone in Figs. 7 (b) and (d). This observation holds in both English and Chinese datasets. These results demonstrate that integrating 
reasoning signals eﬀectively enhances the discriminative power of the learned features.
We also enhance the t-SNE visualizations by explicitly marking the misclassiﬁed samples with crosses to distinguish them from 
correctly classiﬁed samples. In particular, we use red crosses to indicate fake news items that are incorrectly classiﬁed as real, and 
blue crosses to denote real news items that are incorrectly classiﬁed as fake. This more granular visualization oﬀers a clearer picture 
of where the classiﬁcation errors occur in the latent space and provides more actionable insight for guiding future improvements. By 
comparing Fig. 7 (a) which incorporates reason-content aggregation and Fig. 7 (b) which uses only content embeddings in the English 
dataset, we observe that the red crosses in Fig. 7 (b) are more numerous and widely scattered across the embedding space. In contrast, 
the misclassiﬁed samples in Fig. 7 (a) are visibly fewer and more concentrated. This indicates that the content-only embedding leads 
to more dispersed and confusing representations, making inaccurate classiﬁcation, while the reason-content aggregation embeddings 
exhibit clearer separation with fewer misclassiﬁed points scattered across the opposite cluster, proving that the proposed interaction 
attention from reasons improves feature discriminability and reduces confusion between classes.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
16 
===== PAGE 17 =====
S. Yin et al.
5.  Conclusion
Given the critical role of external knowledge in fake news detection, traditional SLM-based methods either cannot learn the 
background information (e.g., historical facts) or require high acquisition costs. To address this, we propose an explainable LLM-
assisted fake news detection method, which outperforms existing SLM-based and LLM-based methods. Additionally, considering the 
label imbalance caused by the facts of true news over fake news on social platforms, we introduce the LFND-AB framework, which 
employs an adaptive ensemble boosting strategy. By using LFND as the base learner, LFND-AB enhances the model’s robustness in 
imbalanced data scenarios and achieves superior performance in detecting fake news, as compared to the base LFND model.
Looking ahead, several interesting directions can be further explored. First, we plan to incorporate causal reasoning mechanisms to 
more explicitly model the underlying cause–eﬀect relations between LLM-generated reasons and news content, thereby strengthening 
the explainability and decisiveness of evidence. Second, the semantic diversity of generated reasons will be enhanced by developing 
diversity-oriented prompting strategies and embedding-based similarity assessment to avoid redundancy and enrich informational 
coverage. Third, recent studies have explored whether the learnable weights of model inference, such as attention weights or rationale 
scores, are aligned with human-perceived reasoning quality (Brauwers & Frasincar, 2023; Zeng et al., 2025). Incorporating human 
ratings or external rationale-quality supervision could further enhance the explainability of the attention mechanism. 
6.  Ethical considerations and limitations
The proposed LFND and LFND-AB methods have potential for integration into content management systems on social media 
platforms. For example, they could be deployed as automated pre-screening tools to ﬂag potentially misleading news content during 
the early stages of dissemination, which helps identify high-risk posts for manual review. Additionally, the models could also be 
incorporated into public-facing systems, such as browser extensions, to provide users with real-time authenticity cues while consuming 
news. However, real-world deployment requires careful attention to several ethical concerns. First, misclassiﬁcation by the model may 
lead to undesirable consequences. On the one hand, a high false positive rate, where large volumes of truthful news are incorrectly 
labeled as fake, may result in wasted human veriﬁcation resources and reduced trust in the system’s reliability. On the other hand, 
false negatives, where harmful fake news is not detected in time, could prolong public exposure to misinformation and potentially 
trigger widespread panic or misinformed behavior. Second, although the dual-perspective reasoning generated by LLMs improves 
model explainability, these generated reasons may carry cultural or linguistic biases. This may cause systematic misjudgment of news 
originating from speciﬁc regions or targeting certain communities. Furthermore, it is important to consider the trade-oﬀ between 
detection accuracy, model complexity, and computational eﬃciency in practical deployments. While LFND and its variant LFND-AB 
oﬀer higher accuracy, they incur greater computational cost compared to lightweight models such as BERT. In real-world applications, 
these models can be ﬂexibly selected based on speciﬁc performance requirements and acceptable trade-oﬀs among accuracy, resource 
availability, and time constraints.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shu Yin: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization; Yuchen Wang: Writing – review & editing, 
Formal analysis; Dongpeng Hou: Writing – review & editing, Validation; Wenxin An: Writing – review & editing; Chao Gao: Su-
pervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition; Xianghua Li: Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition; Zhen 
Wang: Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.
Acknowlegment
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. U22B2036, 62471403, 62271411), 
the Technological Innovation Team of Shaanxi Province (No. 2025RS-CXTD-009), the International Cooperation Project of Shaanxi 
Province (No. 2025GH-YBXM-017).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Bazmi, P., Asadpour, M., & Shakery, A. (2023). Multi-view co-attention network for fake news detection by modeling topic-speciﬁc user and news source credibility. 
Information Processing & Management, 60(1). 
Bian, T., Xiao, X., Xu, T., Zhao, P., Huang, W., Rong, Y., & Huang, J. (2020). Rumor detection on social media with bi-directional graph convolutional networks. In 
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 549–556).
Brauwers, G., & Frasincar, F. (2023). A general survey on attention mechanisms in deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(4), 3279–3298.
Capuano, N., Fenza, G., Loia, V., & Nota, F. D. (2023). Content-based fake news detection with machine and deep learning: A systematic review. Neurocomputing, 530, 
91–103.
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yi, X., Wang, C., Wang, Y. et al. (2024). A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM 
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(3), 1–45.
Chen, C., & Shu, K. (2023). Combating misinformation in the age of llms: opportunities and challenges. AI Magazine.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
17 
===== PAGE 18 =====
S. Yin et al.
Chen, T., Li, X., Yin, H., & Zhang, J. (2018). Call attention to rumors: Deep attention based recurrent neural networks for early rumor detection. In Trends and 
applications in knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 40–52).
Cheung, T.-H., & Lam, K.-M. (2023). Factllama: Optimizing instruction-following language models with external knowledge for automated fact-checking. In 2023 Asia 
paciﬁc signal and information processing association annual summit and conference (pp. 846–853).
Cui, C., & Jia, C. (2024). Propagation tree is not deep: Adaptive graph contrastive learning approach for rumor detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on 
artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 73–81).
Demšar, J. (2006). Statistical comparisons of classiﬁers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(Jan), 1–30.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 
conference of the north american chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) (pp. 4171–4186).
Dou, Y., Shu, K., Xia, C., Yu, P. S., & Sun, L. (2021). User preference-aware fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 44th international ACM SIGIR conference on research 
and development in information retrieval (pp. 2051–2055).
Guo, H., Zeng, W., Tang, J., & Zhao, X. (2023). Interpretable fake news detection with graph evidence. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM international conference on 
information and knowledge management (pp. 659–668).
Hou, D., Gao, C., Wang, Z., Li, X., & Li, X. (2024). Random full-order-coverage based rapid source localization with limited observations for large-scale networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, 11(5), 4213–4226.
Hu, B., Sheng, Q., Cao, J., Shi, Y., Li, Y., Wang, D., & Qi, P. (2024). Bad actor, good advisor: Exploring the role of large language models in fake news detection. In 
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 22105–22113).
Hu, B., Sheng, Q., Cao, J., Zhu, Y., Wang, D., Wang, Z., & Jin, Z. (2023). Learn over past, evolve for future: Forecasting temporal trends for fake news detection. In 
Proceedings of the 61st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 5: Industry track) (pp. 116–125).
Hu, S., Zhang, C., Zou, G., Lou, Z., & Ye, Y. (2025). Deep multiview clustering by pseudo-label guided contrastive learning and dual correlation learning. IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 36(2), 3646–3658.
Jin, W., Gao, Y., Tao, T., Wang, X., Wang, N., Wu, B., & Zhao, B. (2025a). Veracity-oriented context-aware large language models–based prompting optimization for 
fake news detection. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2025(1), 5920142.
Jin, W., Su, D., Tao, T., Wang, X., Wang, N., & Zhao, B. (2025b). Courtroom-FND: A multi-role fake news detection method based on argument switching-based 
courtroom debate. Journal of King Saud University Computer and Information Sciences, 37(3), 33.
Jin, W., Wang, N., Tao, T., Jiang, M., Xing, Y., Zhao, B., Wu, H., Duan, H., & Yang, G. (2025c). A prompting multi-task learning-based veracity dissemination consistency 
reasoning augmentation for few-shot fake news detection. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 144, 110122.
Jin, Z., Cao, J., Zhang, Y., & Luo, J. (2016). News veriﬁcation by exploiting conﬂicting social viewpoints in microblogs. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial 
intelligence (p. 2972–2978).
Kuntur, S., Wróblewska, A., Paprzycki, M., & Ganzha, M. (2024). Under the inﬂuence: A survey of large language models in fake news detection. IEEE Transactions on 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 6(2), 458–476.
Li, M., Peng, B., Galley, M., Gao, J., & Zhang, Z. (2024). Self-checker: Plug-and-play modules for fact-checking with large language models. In Findings of the association 
for computational linguistics: NAACL 2024 (pp. 163–181).
Liang, T., He, Z., Jiao, W., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Wang, R., Yang, Y., Shi, S., & Tu, Z. (2024). Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through 
multi-agent debate. In Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 17889–17904).
Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, X., Chen, X., & Yan, R. (2025). The truth becomes clearer through debate! multi-agent systems with large language models unmask fake news. 
In Proceedings of the 48th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 504–514).
Lu, Y.-W., Chen, C.-Y., & Li, C.-T. (2024). Dual graph networks with synthetic oversampling for imbalanced rumor detection on social media. In Companion proceedings 
of the ACM web conference 2024 (p. 750–753).
Luvembe, A. M., Li, W., Li, S., Liu, F., & Xu, G. (2023). Dual emotion based fake news detection: A deep attention-weight update approach. Information Processing & 
Management, 60(4). 
Ma, J., Gao, W., & Wong, K.-F. (2018). Rumor detection on twitter with tree-structured recursive neural networks. In Proceedings of the 56th annual meeting of the 
association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 1980–1989).
Nan, Q., Cao, J., Zhu, Y., Wang, Y., & Li, J. (2021). Mdfend: Multi-domain fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM international conference on information 
& knowledge management (pp. 3343–3347).
OpenAI (2022). ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/. Accessed: 2023-08-13.
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A. et al. (2022). Training language models to follow 
instructions with human feedback. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 27730–27744).
Pan, S., Luo, L., Wang, Y., Chen, C., Wang, J., & Wu, X. (2024). Unifying large language models and knowledge graphs: a roadmap. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering, 36(7), 3580–3599.
Phung Mai Suong, T., Huynh Nghiem, L., & Khai Tran, T. (2025). Leveraging large language models for enhanced fake news detection: A novel approach using 
explanation-guided networks. Enterprise Information Systems, (p. 2520213).
Przybyla, P. (2020). Capturing the style of fake news. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 490–497).
Qi, P., Cao, J., Li, X., Liu, H., Sheng, Q., Mi, X., He, Q., Lv, Y., Guo, C., & Yu, Y. (2021). Improving fake news detection by using an entity-enhanced framework to fuse 
diverse multimodal clues. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on multimedia (pp. 1212–1220).
Qian, S., Wang, J., Hu, J., Fang, Q., & Xu, C. (2021). Hierarchical multi-modal contextual attention network for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 44th 
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 153–162).
Sheng, Q., Cao, J., Zhang, X., Li, R., Wang, D., & Zhu, Y. (2022). Zoom out and observe: News environment perception for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 
60th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 4543–4556).
Sheng, Q., Zhang, X., Cao, J., & Zhong, L. (2021). Integrating pattern-and fact-based fake news detection via model preference learning. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM 
international conference on information & knowledge management (pp. 1640–1650).
Shu, K., Mahudeswaran, D., Wang, S., Lee, D., & Liu, H. (2020). Fakenewsnet: A data repository with news content, social context, and spatiotemporal information for 
studying fake news on social media. Big Data, 8(3), 171–188.
Shu, K., Sliva, A., Wang, S., Tang, J., & Liu, H. (2017). Fake news detection on social media: A data mining perspective. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 19(1), 
22–36.
Shu, K., Zhou, X., Wang, S., Zafarani, R., & Liu, H. (2019). The role of user proﬁles for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM international conference 
on advances in social networks analysis and mining (pp. 436–439).
Strong, M., Aly, R., & Vlachos, A. (2024). Zero-shot fact veriﬁcation via natural logic and large language models. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: 
EMNLP 2024 (pp. 17021–17035).
Sun, T., Qian, Z., Dong, S., Li, P., & Zhu, Q. (2022). Rumor detection on social media with graph adversarial contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the ACM web 
conference 2022 (pp. 2789–2797).
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true and false news online. Science (New York, N.Y.), 359(6380), 1146–1151.
Wan, H., Feng, S., Tan, Z., Wang, H., Tsvetkov, Y., & Luo, M. (2024). DELL: Generating reactions and explanations for LLM-based misinformation detection. In L.-W. 
Ku, A. Martins, & V. Srikumar (Eds.), Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2024 (pp. 2637–2667).
Wang, B., Li, X., Li, C., Fu, B., Pei, S., & Wang, S. (2024a). Why misinformation is created? detecting them by integrating intent features. In Proceedings of the 33rd 
ACM international conference on information and knowledge management (p. 2304–2314).
Wang, B., Ma, J., Lin, H., Yang, Z., Yang, R., Tian, Y., & Chang, Y. (2024b). Explainable fake news detection with large language model via defense among competing 
wisdom. In Proceedings of the ACM on web conference 2024 (pp. 2452–2463).
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
18 
===== PAGE 19 =====
S. Yin et al.
Wang, J., Qian, S., Hu, J., & Hong, R. (2023). Positive unlabeled fake news detection via multi-modal masked transformer network. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 
26, 234–244.
Wang, R., Li, L., Tao, X., Wang, P., & Liu, P. (2022). Contrastive and attentive graph learning for multi-view clustering. Information Processing & Management, 59(4), 
102967.
Wang, Y., Ma, F., Jin, Z., Yuan, Y., Xun, G., Jha, K., Su, L., & Gao, J. (2018). Eann: Event adversarial neural networks for multi-modal fake news detection. In Proceedings 
of the 24th acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining (pp. 849–857).
Wu, J., Guo, J., & Hooi, B. (2024). Fake news in sheep’s clothing: Robust fake news detection against LLM-empowered style attacks. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM 
SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 3367–3378).
Wu, J., & Hooi, B. (2023). Decor: Degree-corrected social graph reﬁnement for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge 
discovery and data mining (pp. 2582–2593).
Wu, J., Xu, W., Liu, Q., Wu, S., & Wang, L. (2023a). Adversarial contrastive learning for evidence-aware fake news detection with graph neural networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 36(11), 5591–5604.
Wu, L., Long, Y., Gao, C., Wang, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2023b). Mﬁr: Multimodal fusion and inconsistency reasoning for explainable fake news detection. Information Fusion, 
100, 101944.
Wu, L., Rao, Y., Zhang, C., Zhao, Y., & Nazir, A. (2021a). Category-controlled encoder-decoder for fake news detection. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, 35(2), 1242–1257.
Wu, Y., Zhan, P., Zhang, Y., Wang, L., & Xu, Z. (2021b). Multimodal fusion with co-attention networks for fake news detection. In Findings of the association for 
computational linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 (pp. 2560–2569).
Xia, Y., Jiang, H., & Yu, S. (2025). Exploring the dynamics of group-based internet rumors propagation: A novel model from the perspective of random hypergraphs. 
Information Processing & Management, 62(1). 
Xie, B., Ma, X., Shan, X., Beheshti, A., Yang, J., Fan, H., & Wu, J. (2024). Multiknowledge and LLM-inspired heterogeneous graph neural network for fake news 
detection. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, (pp. 1–13).
Xu, C., Xu, Y., Wang, S., Liu, Y., Zhu, C., & McAuley, J. (2024). Small models are valuable plug-ins for large language models. In Findings of the association for 
computational linguistics: ACL 2024 (pp. 283–294).
Yuan, C., Ma, Q., Zhou, W., Han, J., & Hu, S. (2019). Jointly embedding the local and global relations of heterogeneous graph for rumor detection. In 2019 IEEE 
International conference on data mining (pp. 796–805).
Zeng, Y., Ding, X., Cai, B., Liu, T., & Qin, B. (2025). Exploring large language models for eﬀective rumor detection on social media. In Proceedings of the 2025 conference 
of the nations of the americas chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies (volume 1: Long papers) (pp. 2537–2552).
Zhang, H., Liu, X., Yang, Q., Yang, Y., Qi, F., Qian, S., & Xu, C. (2024). T3RD: Test-time training for rumor detection on social media. In Proceedings of the ACM on web 
conference 2024 (pp. 2407–2416).
Zhang, X., Cao, J., Li, X., Sheng, Q., Zhong, L., & Shu, K. (2021). Mining dual emotion for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the web conference 2021 (p. 3465–3476).
Zhou, X., & Zafarani, R. (2020). A survey of fake news: Fundamental theories, detection methods, and opportunities. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(5), 1–40.
Zhu, Y., Sheng, Q., Cao, J., Li, S., Wang, D., & Zhuang, F. (2022a). Generalizing to the future: Mitigating entity bias in fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 45th 
international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 2120–2125).
Zhu, Y., Sheng, Q., Cao, J., Nan, Q., Shu, K., Wu, M., Wang, J., & Zhuang, F. (2022b). Memory-guided multi-view multi-domain fake news detection. IEEE Transactions 
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(7), 7178–7191.
Information Processing and Management 63 (2026) 104789 
19 
